For several years now I’ve been working on a side project in the realm of distributed data. I’ve given a few presentations about it in the past but they failed to generate much interest and I think this was largely due to an over emphasis on the low-level details at the expense of answering the much more important question of “what exactly is this thing and why should I care?”. It seems like a simple question but when I attempted to write out an answer I quickly discovered why I had unconsciously avoided doing so earlier. There isn’t a simple explanation. Most distributed data systems are straight-forward to describe by way of an “is a” statement like “X is a Y”. For example, “the dsNet is an erasure-coded, object storage system”, “Cassandra is a distributed, eventually-consistent noSQL database”, “Kafka is a distributed message queue and stream processing system”. For Aspen though, there is no “Y”. It doesn’t fall into any of the established categories in distributed data systems so I can’t describe it in simple terms. I do have an “is a” statement for Aspen but its meaning probably won’t be immediately apparent: Aspen is a flexible, low-level building block that allows distributed systems and applications to be designed and implemented in terms of distributed data.

The best way to describe designing and implementing something in terms of distributed data is probably to look at the dsNets’s distributed index. It’s an index designed and implemented in terms of distributed data (objects on the dsNet). Aspen greatly expands upon that simple concept by applying it to entire systems and providing the tools needed to optimize those systems to best suit their operational environments. Instead of using the conventional approach where the details of distributed data management are abstracted away behind opaque APIs, Aspen instead provides very low-level access to the underlying data model and allows every aspect of it to be leveraged in the design of higher-level applications. How the data is replicated/erasure coded, where it’s located geographically, what kinds of backing media and storage engines are used, approaches to data migration, desired latency and reliability characteristics, and so on are all tradeoffs that can be tuned to best address whatever problem domain is being targeted.

That’s about as accurate and concise a definition as I can provide about what Aspen is but it does little to address the question of why it’s worth pursuing. In particular, it’s probably not immediately obvious how such a system could be used to address real-world problems or why it might have advantages over a more traditional approach. There isn’t much prior art to point I can point to for this so the only way I can think of to demonstrate how Aspen can be used to so design and implement solutions to real-world problems is by doing exactly that; designing and implementing a solution to a real world problem and then walking through how it works and what the tradeoffs are.

I went with the design and implementation of a distributed file system for several reasons:

1. We all understand how file systems work so it allows me to describe something new in terms of something that’s already well known
2. It’s not an easy problem to solve; just look at project Cardinal.
3. I’ve always been frustrated by the lack of an easy-to-use distributed file system that placed a strong emphasis on dynamic runtime environments.
4. This is what I do for fun

Following the rationale behind the design of the file system requires a basic understanding of the Aspen data model which, fortunately, is pretty simple to explain from a user perspective.

Core Components:

Storage Pools - Storage pools contain a small group of data stores that share object slices/replicas. Objects are allocated from pools and they contain only as many stores as are needed to satisfy the widest IDA intended for use with the pool.

Data Stores - As the name implies, Data Stores handle the actual storage of object slices/replicas. They are relatively small, usually significantly smaller than the size of a single disk and they may be freely migrated between backing media and physical machines (keeping them small helps with migration). 

Objects - Aspen objects are discrete units of data allocated out of storage pools and they come in two forms, Data and KeyValue. Data objects store opaque, binary data and support overwrite and append operations. KeyValue objects on the other hand contain a mapping of keys to tuples of (revision, HLC timestamp, value) and support concurrent, non-conflicting transactions if they operate on disjointed sets of KV pairs within the object. 

* The IDA for each object is defined at the time of its allocation
* There is no explicit Delete operation. Aspen objects are reference counted an they are automatically freed when the reference count reaches zero
* Unlike the dsNet, objects are not segmented. They are more similar to dsNet sources in this regard and they should generally be kept small (10s of megabytes or less).

ObjectPointer - Unlike the dsNet, Aspen does not use a namespace. Instead all objects are located by way of explicit pointers. The pointers are relatively small, around 50 bytes in size, and include a small amount of embedded metadata that describes the IDA of the object and which data stores host the object’s slices/replicas. 

Transaction - All object modifications are made via immediately consistent transactions. The transaction model is similar to CASN in that they may simultaneously update multiple objects but unlike CASN they support much more detailed commit requirements. For example, a transaction updating two objects could use the following commit critera: “DataObject A must be exactly revision 1 and with a refcount of 2. KeyValueObject B must not contain the key “foo”, key “bar” must have a timestamp greater than 5 and less than 100, and the revision of the KeyValue object itself must be 1. The local clock on the store must be less than 200”

Finalization Action - Finalization actions are small, follow-on activities that can be attached to transactions to guarantee that those actions will be executed if the transaction successfully commits. They are similar to intents in the dsNet but use a stronger durability model where stores are not allowed to forget the transaction results for successful transactions until all finalization actions have completed. They provide an “at least once” guarantee and need to be implemented in an idempotent manner as transaction recovery mechanisms could cause them to be executed multiple times.

Derived Components:

Tiered Key Value Lists (TKVL) - These are Aspen’s analogue to the dsNet’s distributed index and they’re structured and used in a similar manner. The bottom-most linked-list contains the data and a upper lists form a B-tree-like structure that provides fast lookup and insert operations for large quantities of data. The primary difference between TKVLs and the dsNet’s distributed index is in the mechanisms used for mitigating contention and write amplification. Contention is largely though not entirely avoided by using Key-Value objects for implementing the linked lists. Concurrent operations inserting, modifying, or deleting Key/Value pairs will not conflict unless they attempt to modify the same keys or result in split or join operations. Splits and joins effectively operate on all key-value pairs contained within the nodes to avoid potential problems with race conditions that might lead to lost operations such as inserting a key/value pair into a node that’s being removed as part of a join operation. KeyValue objects also avoid problems with write amplification due to the fact that transactions send only the desired operations to be applied to the content of the KeyValue objects rather than overwriting the full content with each update. 

TKVLs use a strategy similar to the dsNet where each tier in the tree structure uses immediately-consistent update semantics (splits and joins are atomic) but updates between tiers, such as adding or removing pointers to nodes in the next tier down, are preformed separately. In Aspen this is implemented by attaching Finalization Actions to split/join transactions that update the next tier up. This means that, similar to the dsNet, the tree structure is eventually consistent so navigation of the tree must take this into account. Aspen’s TKVLs have exactly the same issues in this regard as the dsNet so they use the same basic approach to handling missing or invalid pointers.

Object Allocaters - It’s usually advantageous for application-level code to avoid anything to do with storage pools and how they’re managed. Object Allocaters provide an abstract interface that allows application level code to allocate the objects they need without having to understand where those objects will ultimately come from at run time. This simplifies application-level logic and allows for run-time customization of how storage pools should be broken out and organized. Allocaters can also be customized to suit their intended use cases within applications and enable run-time optimizations. The object allocaters for TKVL trees know which tier of the tree they are being asked to allocate objects for so the allocater for a particular tree could be configured, for example, to allocate upper tier nodes as replicated objects backed by SSD media to optimize lookup speed while the data nodes could use an erasure-coded IDA with data backed by traditional hard drives for storage efficiency. 

DurableTask - Finalization Actions are good for simple, short-duration activities like adding or removing content from a TKVL structure but they have some limitations. The big ones being that they require stores to retain the transaction state while the actions remain outstanding and that they can be executed multiple times if the transaction recovery mechanism kicks in. For longer-running operations, particularly those involving multi-step operations or requiring exactly-once semantics, Durable Tasks will generally be a better alternative. The idea behind a DurableTask is that an Aspen object is used to store the task’s state and that state is updated by the transactions used to carry out the task. This provides a simple mechanism for checkpointing the task state for recovery purposes and it enables exactly-once semantics. When performing an action that should happen only once, the transaction carrying out that operation simply needs to additionally update the task state to say that the operation successfully completed. A subsequent recovery or concurrent attempt to run the same task will either see that the action has been carried out or the second attempt to preform the exactly-once operation will fail with an object revision mismatch on the task state.
 
DurableService - Durable Services are similar to Durable Tasks but they are intended to represent long-lived, service oriented tasks that should be running at all times. Like Durable Tasks, each service has an associated state object and they update it regularly to indicate to peers that they are still alive. Should a peer see that the last-modified timestamp exceeds some configured threshold, it may attempt to take over execution of the service by instantiating the service locally and having it successfully update the state object. Potential consistency issues arising from split-brain scenarios can be avoided by way of a variation on Master Leases where successfully updating the service state object grants that instance of the service authority to commit transactions for a limited time after the update completed. The lease is enforced by adding a local server timestamp requirement to every transaction executed on behalf of the service. If the local clock on the store exceeds the lease expiration time it will vote to abort the transaction.
